Add profiles data format (#4965)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/profiles/data-format.md

protobuf file and is based on the [pprof](https://github.com/google/pprof/tree/main/proto) format.
This means that pprof and other established profiling formats can, in most cases,
be unambiguously mapped to this data format. Reverse mapping from this data format is
also possible to the extent that the target profiling format has equivalent capabilities.

The following diagram shows the relationships between messages. Solid arrows represent
embedded relationships. Dashed arrows represent references by index into a dictionary
table.

```mermaid
graph TD
    ProfilesData -->|"1-n"| ResourceProfiles
    ProfilesData -->|"1"| ProfilesDictionary
    ResourceProfiles -->|"1-n"| ScopeProfiles
    ScopeProfiles -->|"1-n"| Profile
    Profile -->|"1-n"| Sample

    Sample -. "n-1" .-> Stack
    Sample -. "1-n" .-> KeyValueAndUnit
    Sample -. "n-1" .-> Link

    Stack -. "1-n" .-> Location

    Location -->|"1-n"| Line
    Location -. "1-n" .-> KeyValueAndUnit
    Location -. "n-1" .-> Mapping

    Line -. "1-1" .-> Function

    Mapping -. "1-n" .-> KeyValueAndUnit
```

## Notable differences compared to other signals

> ### Message referencing

Reviewer: I wonder if it would make sense to move some of the motivation description from the dictionary section below to this section so that the "why" is clearer earlier.

  indicate "null" / "not set".
- There SHOULD NOT be duplicate items in the dictionary. The identity of a
  dictionary item is based on its value, recursively as needed. If a particular
  implementation does emit duplicate items, it MUST NOT attempt to give them
  meaning based on the index or order. A processor MAY remove duplicates,
  and this MUST NOT have any observable effects for consumers.
- There SHOULD NOT be orphaned (unreferenced) entries. A processor MAY remove
  orphaned entries and this MUST NOT have any observable effects for consumers.

### Attributes

The data format uses two kinds of attributes:

1. **Standard `KeyValue` attributes**: the same
   [`KeyValue`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto)
   pairs used by other signals. These appear on [`Resource`](../resource/README.md) and
   [`InstrumentationScope`](../common/instrumentation-scope.md) messages
   and follow the usual OpenTelemetry attribute semantics (unique keys, no unit)
   with the profiles-specific extension of string reference fields for keys and values
   (see [next section](#dictionary-use-in-keyvalue)).

> 2. **[`KeyValueAndUnit`](#message-keyvalueandunit) attributes**:

Reviewer: Sounds good.

| Field | Type | Description |
| ----- | ---- | ----------- |
| scope | [`InstrumentationScope`](../common/instrumentation-scope.md) | The instrumentation scope information. When not set, equivalent to an empty (unknown) scope name. |
| profiles | repeated [`Profile`](#message-profile) | A list of profiles that originate from this instrumentation scope. |
| schema_url | string | The [Schema URL](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/schemas/#schema-url) for the data in the `scope` field and all profiles in the `profiles` field. |

### Message `Profile`

Represents a complete profile: sample types, samples, mappings to binaries,
stacks, locations, functions and associated metadata. It modifies and annotates
pprof Profile with OpenTelemetry specific fields.

Note that whilst some fields in this message retain the name and field id from pprof
(for ease of understanding data migration), it is not intended that pprof:Profile and
OpenTelemetry:Profile encoding be wire compatible.

Measurements encoded in this format should follow the following conventions:

- Consumers should treat unset optional fields as if they had been
  set with their default value.

> - When possible, measurements should be stored in "unsampled" form

Reviewer: Do we want to state this stronger? Client-side unsampling is error-prone in case the sampling rate changes.

  that is most useful to humans.  There should be enough
  information present to determine the original sampled values.

> - The profile is represented as a set of samples, where each sample

Reviewer: This bullet doesn't quite belong to the "conventions" list as it's more about the data model than a convention?

Similarly for the two bullets below. I'd try to separate maybe the data model clarifications from conventions that are less captured in the protobuf definition.

Author: Removed that whole section (lives in the proto now as the single source of truth)

| address | uint64 | The instruction address for this location, if available, SHOULD be within `[Mapping.memory_start, Mapping.memory_limit]` for the corresponding mapping. A non-leaf address may be in the middle of a call instruction. It is up to display tools to find the beginning of the instruction if necessary. [optional] |
| lines | repeated [`Line`](#message-line) | Multiple lines indicate inlined functions, where the last entry represents the caller into which the preceding entries were inlined. For example, if `memcpy()` is inlined into `printf`: `lines[0].function_name == "memcpy"`, `lines[1].function_name == "printf"`. |
| attribute_indices | repeated int32 | References to attributes in [`ProfilesDictionary.attribute_table`](#message-profilesdictionary). [optional] |

### Message `Line`

Details a specific line in source code, linked to a function.

| Field | Type | Description |
| ----- | ---- | ----------- |
| function_index | int32 | Reference to a [`Function`](#message-function) in [`ProfilesDictionary.function_table`](#message-profilesdictionary). |

> | line | int64 | Line number in source code. 0 means unset. |

Reviewer: Maybe clarify "1-based"? It can be implied from "0 means unset" but I'd state it more explicitly.

and [`AnyValue`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto)
messages with string reference fields that point into [`ProfilesDictionary.string_table`](#message-profilesdictionary):

- `KeyValue.key_strindex`: an index into the string table, used in place of
  the inline `key` field. Exactly one of `key` or `key_strindex` MUST be set.
- `AnyValue.string_value_strindex`: an index into the string table, used in
  place of the inline `string_value` field. Exactly one of `string_value` or
  `string_value_strindex` MUST be set when the value is a string.

This is done because [`Resource`](../resource/README.md) attributes
frequently repeat the same string values across many profiles or samples
in a single [`ProfilesData`](#message-profilesdata) message (e.g. `service.name`, `host.name`).

## Message descriptions

### Message `ProfilesData`

`ProfilesData` is the top-level message and encapsulates data that can be stored
in persistent storage or embedded by other protocols that transfer OTLP Profiles
but do not implement the OTLP protocol.

| Field | Type | Description |
| ----- | ---- | ----------- |

> | resource_profiles | repeated [`ResourceProfiles`](#message-resourceprofiles) | An array of `ResourceProfiles`.<br><br>For data coming from an SDK profiler this array will typically contain one element. Host-level profilers will usually create one `ResourceProfiles` per container, as well as an additional one grouping all samples from non-containerized processes. Other resource groupings are possible as well and clarified via [`Resource`](../resource/README.md) attributes and semantic conventions.<br><br>Tools that visualize profiles SHOULD prefer displaying `resource_profiles[0].scope_profiles[0].profiles[0]` by default. |

Reviewer 2: >SHOULD prefer displaying `resource_profiles[0].scope_profiles[0].profiles[0]` by default

Can you clarify why this preference?

  * [Message: `KeyValueAndUnit`](#message-keyvalueandunit)
- [Relationships with other signals](#relationships-with-other-signals)
  * [From profiles to other signals](#from-profiles-to-other-signals)
  * [From other signals to profiles](#from-other-signals-to-profiles)
- [Example payloads](#example-payloads)
  * [Simple CPU profile](#simple-cpu-profile)
  * [CPU profile with resource attributes and span link](#cpu-profile-with-resource-attributes-and-span-link)
- [References](#references)

<!-- tocstop -->

</details>

## Overview

The OpenTelemetry data format for Profiles consists of a protocol specification
and [semantic conventions](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/general/profiles/)
for encoding and delivery of aggregated stack traces and associated metadata.

The protocol specification is defined in the
[profiles.proto](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/profiles/v1development/profiles.proto)
protobuf file and is based on the [pprof](https://github.com/google/pprof/tree/main/proto) format.
This means that pprof and other established profiling formats can (always for pprof, in most cases

> for other formats) be unambiguously mapped to this data format. Lossless reverse mapping from this

Reviewer 3: As there were no tests for convertability, for other profiling formats, like Fuchsia tracing format, Chrome JSON format, Firefox Profiler JSON format, or Android systrace format, I think this part of the sentence should be removed.
```suggestion
This means that pprof can be unambiguously mapped to this data format. Lossless reverse mapping from this
```

data format is also possible to the extent that the target profiling format has equivalent capabilities.

The following diagram shows the relationships between messages. Solid arrows represent
embedded relationships. Dashed arrows represent references by index into a dictionary
table.

```mermaid
graph TD
    ProfilesData -->|"1-n"| ResourceProfiles
    ProfilesData -->|"1"| ProfilesDictionary
    ResourceProfiles -->|"1-n"| ScopeProfiles
    ScopeProfiles -->|"1-n"| Profile
    Profile -->|"1-n"| Sample

    Sample -. "n-1" .-> Stack
    Sample -. "n-n" .-> KeyValueAndUnit

>     Sample -. "n-1" .-> Link

Reviewer 3: This might be missleading. A single Sample can have only a single reference to a Link.
```suggestion
    Sample -. "1-1" .-> Link
```

The visualization in https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/profiles/v1development/profiles.proto might be wrong on this.

Author: Here, n-1 means that multiple samples can refer to the same link.

>     Stack -. "n-n" .-> Location

Reviewer 3: A `n-n` would imply that the number of Stacks are equal to the number of Locations.

```suggestion
    Stack -. "n-m" .-> Location
```

Overall, I would prefer the "reading-flow" from top to buttom like in https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/profiles/v1development/profiles.proto.

A single Stack can have multiple Locations, and so `1-n`.

Author: In entity relationships, n-n is a common, well-specified term for 'many-to-many'. Also see [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4965#discussion_r2968059475) where it's been previously discussed.

    Location -->|"1-n"| Line
    Location -. "n-n" .-> KeyValueAndUnit
    Location -. "n-1" .-> Mapping

    Line -. "1-1" .-> Function

    Mapping -. "n-n" .-> KeyValueAndUnit
```

## Notable differences compared to other signals

Profilers generate large amounts of data and users are highly sensitive to
the overhead that profiling introduces. With that in mind, we designed the
Profiles data format departing from other OpenTelemetry signals in several
ways. This was done to keep payload sizes small and processing costs low
while remaining compatible with [pprof](./pprof.md) and the rest of the
OpenTelemetry ecosystem.

### Message embedding

Most OpenTelemetry signals use direct ("by value") embedding: a span in a trace embeds
its events and links. A log record contains its attributes inline.

Profiles use both "by value" and "by reference" embedding schemes:

1. **Direct embedding** is used for the outer hierarchy
   (`ProfilesData` &#x2192; `ResourceProfiles` &#x2192; `ScopeProfiles`
   &#x2192; `Profile` &#x2192; `Sample`).
2. **Index-based referencing** into a shared [dictionary](#message-profilesdictionary)

>    is used for all other relationships. Samples reference stacks, attributes and links

Reviewer 3: > [..] is used for all other relationships

With `message Line` there is an exception. `lines` is not indexed in `message Location` but directly embedded.

Author: I'l reword this.

   rather than relying solely on semantic conventions.

### Dictionary use in KeyValue

To minimize payload size, the data format extends the standard
OpenTelemetry [`KeyValue`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto)
and [`AnyValue`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto)
messages with string reference fields that point into [`ProfilesDictionary.string_table`](#message-profilesdictionary):

- `KeyValue.key_strindex`: an index into the string table, used in place of
  the inline `key` field. Exactly one of `key` or `key_strindex` MUST be set.
- `AnyValue.string_value_strindex`: an index into the string table, used in
  place of the inline `string_value` field. Exactly one of `string_value` or
  `string_value_strindex` MUST be set when the value is a string.

This is done because [`Resource`](../resource/README.md) attributes
frequently repeat the same string values across many profiles or samples
in a single [`ProfilesData`](#message-profilesdata) message (e.g. `service.name`, `host.name`).

> 

Reviewer 3: I think it is important to note here, that the _strindex is only used on the wire, while in the OTel collector, `key` is populated so that other OTel components can make use of the information without having to deal with OTel Profiles specifics.

OpenTelemetry Profiles support bi-directional links with other signals across
two dimensions:

* Correlation by resource context
* Correlation by direct reference

Correlation by resource context is simply linking profile data to the same
[Resource](../resource/README.md) that emitted the associated logs, metrics or
traces, such as the same service instance.

There are two types of direct reference relationships between profiles and other
signals:

* from profiles to other signals
* from other signals to profiles

### From profiles to other signals

[`Link`](#message-link) connects a profile [`Sample`](#message-sample) to a
trace span via `trace_id` and `span_id`. Because other signals such as logs
and metrics may use the same trace/span identifiers, profiles can be correlated
with those signals through this shared trace context.

### From other signals to profiles

Other signals can reference a profile using the `profile_id` field on the
[`Profile`](#message-profile) message. For example, a log record may carry a
`profile_id` attribute to reference the profile that was collected at the time
the log record was generated. Note that the `profile_id` field is currently

> optional at the source, but may be populated after collection (e.g. in the
> OpenTelemetry Collector processing pipeline).

Reviewer 3: There is no component doing so.
```suggestion
optional at the source.
```

Author: We use 'may' to signify the possibility (clarifying another aspect of this format), not necessarily that it's currently done.

Moreover, `trace_id` and `span_id` can be used to reference groups of
[`Sample`](#message-sample) (but not individual) messages in a profile,
since samples are linked to traces using [`Link`](#message-link) messages.

## Example payloads

### Simple CPU profile

> The following example shows an On-CPU profile collected by a sampling profiler

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example shows an on-CPU profile collected by a sampling profiler
```

running at 20Hz (one sample every 50ms of actual CPU execution time). Two
unique stack traces were observed: One (seen 3 times) has the call stack
`main -> foo -> bar` and the other (seen 2 times) has the call stack `main -> baz`.

String and dictionary indices are shown inline for clarity.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To keep the example simple, standard OpenTelemetry message components such as ResourceAttributes are omitted.
```

Author: No need to mention this IMO, we'd be adding more words and introduce ambiguity (as we're hinting at extra information that isn't shown which can cause the example shown to no longer be perceived as self-contained).

      Function { name_strindex: 5, filename_strindex: 7 }, // index 1: handleRequest
      Function { name_strindex: 6, filename_strindex: 8 }, // index 2: db.Query
    ]
    location_table: [
      Location {},                                                 // index 0: null
      Location { lines: [Line { function_index: 1, line: 45 }] },  // index 1: handleRequest
      Location { lines: [Line { function_index: 2, line: 112 }] }, // index 2: db.Query
    ]
    stack_table: [
      Stack {},                           // index 0: null
      Stack { location_indices: [2, 1] }, // index 1: db.Query <- handleRequest
      Stack { location_indices: [1] },    // index 2: handleRequest
    ]
    link_table: [
      Link {},                                     // index 0: null
      Link {                                       // index 1
        trace_id: 1122aabbccddeeff0000000000000000
        span_id:  ff01020304050607
      },
    ]
    mapping_table:   [Mapping {}]
    attribute_table: [KeyValueAndUnit {}]
  }
  resource_profiles: [ResourceProfiles {
    resource: Resource {
      attributes: [
        { key_strindex: 9, string_value_strindex: 11 }, // "service.name", "my-service"

>         { key_strindex: 10, string_value_strindex: 12 }, // "process.executable.name", "my-service.bin"

Reviewer 3: With AnyValue there is another indirection.

```suggestion
        { key_strindex: 9, value: { string_value_strindex: 11 } }, // "service.name", "my-service"
        { key_strindex: 10, value: { string_value_strindex: 12 } }, // "process.executable.name", "my-service.bin"
```
